---
title: "What Is the Identity and Access Provisioning Lifecycle?"
date: 2021-10-02
# weight: 1
# aliases: ["/first"]
tags: ["API Development", "Auth", "Security", "CISSP", "Best Practices"]
categories: ["API Development", "Security", "Auth", "Best Practices"]
# series: ["Security"]
author: "Daniel Paes"
# author: ["Me", "You"] # multiple authors
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
canonicalURL: ""
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
disableHLJS: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
ShowWordCount: false
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: true
UseHugoToc: true
cover:
    image: "https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/78096758/217093426-436f010a-c195-4c2a-a9ae-8afb1e991d6d.png" 
---
Hello everyone, today I want to revisit what is Identity and Access provisioning lifecycle phases.

With so much data being generated every second, it makes sense that [data leakages](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2021/04/20/how-much-data-was-leaked-to-cybercriminals-in-2020---and-what-theyre-doing-with-it/?sh=27de87121f03) are one of the biggest nightmares of any data-driven company. These days, we learn fast that weak security policies can be costly. This article will present one of the techniques to maintain your data secured: the identity and access provisioning lifecycle.

To help you understand this lifecycle, I'll present the action steps of its two states categories: provisioning and de-provisioning. I'll start by identifying the tasks and explaining what "identity and access provisioning" means. Then I'll explain which actions to take to correctly achieve those states, from understanding the needs and requesting access for your identities (the **_provisioning state_**) or removing the unnecessary ones (the **_de-provisioning state_**).

I'll follow by introducing how to implement the access provisioning lifecycle. You'll get a look at the access provisioning models and how different provisioning models deploy the concepts I introduced in the previous paragraph. I'll describe how different types of access provisioning models work.
Let's start with the basics.
<br /><br />

## <h2>What Is the Identity and Access Provisioning Lifecycle?</h2><br />

In every company, there are multiple systems with different sorts of data. Some data may be in the public domain. Other data requires different privacy rules. That's because its exposure could cause some problems, such as having your competitors become aware of your next steps.

It's essential to correctly onboard any new team member with the correct privileges to do their jobs. You can make this onboarding process easier by providing a unique identifier related to this new member.

This could be a physical identifier, such as an identification badge or two-factor authentication device. Or it could be a logical identifier. These identifiers, such as the UID or the Unique Identity, are used for physical access to the company's facilities.

When an alert is triggered, confirmations to remove the no longer required accesses are revoked. The admin team should never confirm access requests. Instead, other peers should validate these requests. Access requests must always come from the user or manager request following all the necessary validations. The administration team should never mention or start an access request.

In most companies, it's up to the Human Resources department to make the requests. As a result, those requests usually happen during the hiring process or when a person takes on a new role. Those requests fall under one of the two categories listed below:

- **User provisioning tasks:** _Onboarding_ of a new colleague or adding new rights to current access privileges.
- **User de-provisioning tasks:** _Offboarding_ some responsibilities by removing unnecessary rights to current access privileges.

Let's get into these in more depth.
<br /><br />

## <h2>Provisioning and De-Provisioning</h2><br />

User access provisioning means managing the access control of your users to the necessary systems for their work. Those access privileges come by either granting accesses due to new responsibilities or removing accesses for the same reason.

With that being said, the constant validation of current access per identifier is crucial. These validations help to narrow the attack surface from untrusted sources. It's a critical step. So, it's a good practice to periodically revisit as the user gains new responsibilities and needs more access.

De-provisioning means handling all the necessary steps for revoking access that isn't needed. It also involves alerting all the required departments of the changes in access.
The access provisioning models are the components that orchestrate all these requests seamlessly. Using the models, you can expand existing accesses with new ones. Or you can de-commission a particular user as needed.

All right! Let's take a closer look at the different models; let's start with RBAC.
<br /><br />

## <h2>Access Provisioning Models: Role-Based Access Control (RBAC).</h2><br />

To understand what role-based access control (RBAC) means, I want to present what role actually means for identity and access management. For this kind of access, provisioning users are labeled by either the department or role that they're part of.

It's good to point out that these labels are managed by role-based access provisioning. All these are related actions of granting and/or revoking access to the whole group that the identity belongs to. And that removes the need to apply rules for individual identities.

In other words, the policy is to control access not by using a single identifier but by grouping the same user functions. This approach is faster and easier than making judgments individually based on identity and requests.

Let's imagine an the following use-case; **a developer's or manager's role-based access provisioning**.

Where as the developer needs to have full access to the development environment and limited access to management tools to track their work. The managers on the other hand, needs the opposite. As managers won't be as deep on the technical; they might not need full access to the development environments. However, managers will require full access to the working tracking tools to manage new clients' needs.

For successful deployment, all necessary configurations per group must have strict validations based on the scope of the group managed. So there's no point in adding programmatic access on the development pipelines to your financial team, for example. They don't need that kind of access.
<br /><br />

## <h2>Access Provisioning Models: Request-Based Access Provisioning (RBAP).</h2><br />

For starters, this differs from RBAP in terms of the request-based access provisioning. In some systems, direct requests need to go to the system owner. One example is asking for permission to access regulated systems. We call this [discretionary access control](https://www.techopedia.com/definition/229/discretionary-access-control-dac) (or DAC).

On the other hand, when you're using mandatory access control (or MAC), the resource accesses are tagged by how classified the information on these systems is. This categorization will follow how your business classifies your data internally. I suggest taking a look here if you need more details about [information classification handling procedures](https://www.flinders.edu.au/content/dam/documents/staff/policies/facilities-info-management/information-classification-handling-procedures.pdf).

A good use case of a MAC is when there are some more restricted cases, such as handling social insurance numbers. It's good to remember that all complementary information related to security procedures to handle this kind of information also comes with those approvals.

In contrast, the DAC would require only the discretion of the system owner. So, if you manage to convince the owner of that system, then that person will provide you access to it. (Being a good friend of the administrator also helps!)
<br /><br />

## <h2>Hybrid Provisioning</h2><br />

There may be cases when you need temporary access to a system that your existing role doesn't provide access to. In that case, hybrid provisioning will be handy. It allows you to have the onboarding process for normal access provisioning. It also enables any special requests with a long line of approvals for ad hoc access provisioning. Sometimes, expanding the existing access scope quickly for ad hoc tasks might be necessary.

Secondly, It's essential to define the life span of this access and set an expiration date for each type of access. And that means having extra validation steps from additional levels of management. The hybrid provisioning model can help you do this. You'll need to figure out the details as you define the security blueprint of your company.
I want to list below a few rules of thumb to think about when you figure out security privileges.

- **Always prefer restrictive access provisioning policies.**
- **Have an audit in place to reinforce those restrictive access provisioning policies.**
- **Revoke any unused accesses based on the auditing results.**
- **Revalidate the onboarding and offboarding procedures in your company.** (It's time to set some If you don't have any of those in place.)
<br /><br />

## <h2>Conclusion </h2><br />

Today, we started out by defining what identity means and what provisioning and de-provisioning accesses are. And I followed up by presenting the necessary steps to maintain the access provisioning lifecycle with the help of the provisioning models.
On the other hand, it's good to have third-party tools like [Okta](https://www.okta.com/) or [Keycloak](https://www.keycloak.org/) to help with access provisioning on your ecosystem. Okta manages manual deployment in a more automated way, provisioning and de-provisioning access in a more fluid manner. For that, I suggest looking at our previous blog posts at how to correctly configure it on your AWS environment and more details on [AWS roles with Okta management](https://compliance.dev/2020/07/17/okta-aws-join-all-roles-setting/).

For further help transforming your data, you can [reach out to us](https://calendly.com/dawrlog) with any questions you have and even discover new info you weren't aware of with a better insight from better understanding your data.

See you next time!