---
title: "Reference chart of cloud offerings for Storage"
date: 2023-02-15
# weight: 1
# aliases: ["/first"]
tags: ["Data Storage", "Storage", "Cloud"]
categories: ["Data Storage", "Storage", "Cloud"]
# series: ["Data Stack"]
author: "Caroline Ferreira"
# author: ["Me", "You"] # multiple authors
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
disableHLJS: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
ShowWordCount: false
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: true
UseHugoToc: true
cover:
    image: "https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/78096758/219223745-0274fbe9-6dda-41cb-9547-42060245a6ab.png" 
---

Hello everyone,


It is easy to get lost these days, when choosing a managed cloud service. By being bombarded every day with new products, it takes time to easily keep track of your options. Today I would like to share a reference image of some of those options for data storage using managed cloud services; focusing on Azure, Google, and Amazon.


Here we can see the major cloud provider offerings for NoSql options for semi-structured data and the relational option. We can also see storage classes, which allow the same storage to be used by different products. Storage classes are beneficial when running your compute fleet while having the same place to check for your files or even write your logs. Allowing your systems to not count only on the local storage of your applications, also called `ephemeral storage`. 

This type of storage is more volatile when compared to others, by using storage classes one can separate the storage used by your instances. Providing visible gains on your environment performance, in addition of adding more flexibility while calculating your compute and storage costs and needs.

Another perceived benefit from the usage of storage classes comes when it is needed to autoscale your application by its processing metrics instead of being worried about having your servers flagged with their `Disk at full capacity.` Storage classes allow you to create a shared storage place accessible by your compute fleet simultaneously! Extra useful while storing your application logs in a persistent location. 



Check out our other posts and stay tuned for new materials!